1. Int J Comput Assist Radiol Surg. 2025 Apr 24. doi: 10.1007/s11548-025-03359-4.
 Online ahead of print.

perfDSA: Automatic Perfusion Imaging in Cerebral Digital Subtraction 
Angiography.

Su R(1)(2), van der Sluijs PM(3), Marc FG(4), Te Nijenhuis F(3), Cornelissen 
SAP(3), Roozenbeek B(3), van Zwam WH(5), van der Lugt A(3), Ruijters D(6), Pluim 
J(4), van Walsum T(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Eindhoven University of Technology, 
Eindhoven, The Netherlands. r.su@tue.nl.
(2)Department of Radiology & Nuclear Medicine, Erasmus MC, University Medical 
Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. r.su@tue.nl.
(3)Department of Radiology & Nuclear Medicine, Erasmus MC, University Medical 
Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Eindhoven University of Technology, 
Eindhoven, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Radiology & Nuclear Medicine, Maastricht University Medical 
Center, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(6)Interventional X-Ray (iXR), Philips Healthcare, Best, The Netherlands.

PURPOSE: Cerebral digital subtraction angiography (DSA) is a standard imaging 
technique in image-guided interventions for visualizing cerebral blood flow and 
therapeutic guidance thanks to its high spatio-temporal resolution. To date, 
cerebral perfusion characteristics in DSA are primarily assessed visually by 
interventionists, which is time-consuming, error-prone, and subjective. To 
facilitate fast and reproducible assessment of cerebral perfusion, this work 
aims to develop and validate a fully automatic and quantitative framework for 
perfusion DSA.
METHODS: We put forward a framework, perfDSA, that automatically generates 
deconvolution-based perfusion parametric images from cerebral DSA. It 
automatically extracts the arterial input function from the supraclinoid 
internal carotid artery (ICA) and computes deconvolution-based perfusion 
parametric images including cerebral blood volume (CBV), cerebral blood flow 
(CBF), mean transit time (MTT), and Tmax.
RESULTS: On a DSA dataset with 1006 patients from the multicenter MR CLEAN 
registry, the proposed perfDSA achieves a Dice of 0.73(±0.21) in segmenting the 
supraclinoid ICA, resulting in high accuracy of arterial input function (AIF) 
curves similar to manual extraction. Moreover, some extracted perfusion images 
show statistically significant associations (P=2.62e -  5) with favorable 
functional outcomes in stroke patients.
CONCLUSION: The proposed perfDSA framework promises to aid therapeutic 
decision-making in cerebrovascular interventions and facilitate discoveries of 
novel quantitative biomarkers in clinical practice. The code is available at 
https://github.com/RuishengSu/perfDSA .

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s11548-025-03359-4
PMID: 40272658

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Conflict of interest: Wim H. van 
Zwam received speaker fees from Philips, Nicolab, Stryker, Penumbra, Medtronic, 
Microvention DSMB for WeTrust (Philips) and ATHENA (Anaconda), all paid to the 
institution. Aad van der Lugt received research grants from Siemens 
Healthineers, GE Healthcare, and Philips Healthcare, all paid to the 
institution. Danny Ruijters is an employee of Philips. Theo van Walsum received 
research grants from Philips Healthcare, paid to the institution. The rest of 
the authors have no competing financial or nonfinancial interests to disclose 
beyond the funding sources listed above. Ethics approval: The MR CLEAN Registry 
was approved by the ethics committee of the Erasmus University MC, Rotterdam, 
The Netherlands (MEC-2014-235). The need for individual patient consent has been 
waived. Patient consent for publication: Not applicable.