1. Dis Colon Rectum. 2025 Mar 4. doi: 10.1097/DCR.0000000000003677. Online ahead
of  print.

Visceral Fat Quantified by a Fully Automated Deep-Learning Algorithm and Risk of 
Incident and Recurrent Diverticulitis.

Ha J(1)(2), Bridge CP(3)(4), Andriole KP(3)(5), Kambadakone A(4), Clark 
MJ(1)(2), Narimiti A(1)(2), Rosenthal MH(5)(6), Fintelmann FJ(4), Gollub 
RL(4)(7), Giovannucci EL(8), Strate LL(9), Ma W(1)(2), Chan 
AT(1)(2)(10)(11)(12).

Author information:
(1)Clinical and Translational Epidemiology Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital 
and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General 
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(3)Data Science Office, Mass General Brigham, Boston, Massachusetts.
(4)Department of Radiology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(5)Department of Radiology, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(6)Department of Imaging, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts.
(7)Department of Psychiatry, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(8)Departments of Epidemiology and Nutrition, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public 
Health, Boston, Massachusetts.
(9)Division of Gastroenterology, University of Washington School of Medicine, 
Seattle, Washington.
(10)Channing Division of Network Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital and 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(11)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
(12)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard T.H. Chan School 
of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts.

BACKGROUND: Obesity is a risk factor for diverticulitis. However, it remains 
unclear whether visceral fat area, a more precise measurement of abdominal fat, 
is associated with the risk of diverticulitis.
OBJECTIVE: To estimate the risk of incident and recurrent diverticulitis 
according to visceral fat area.
DESIGN: A retrospective cohort study.
SETTINGS: The Mass General Brigham Biobank.
PATIENTS: 6,654 patients who underwent abdominal CT for clinical indications and 
had no diagnosis of diverticulitis, inflammatory bowel disease, or cancer before 
the scan.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Visceral fat area, subcutaneous fat area, and skeletal 
muscle area were quantified using a deep-learning model applied to abdominal CT. 
The main exposures were z-scores of body composition metrics, normalized by age, 
sex, and race. Diverticulitis cases were defined with the ICD codes for the 
primary or admitting diagnosis from the electronic health records. The risks of 
incident diverticulitis, complicated diverticulitis, and recurrent 
diverticulitis requiring hospitalization according to quartiles of body 
composition metrics z-scores were estimated.
RESULTS: A higher visceral fat area z-score was associated with an increased 
risk of incident diverticulitis (multivariable HR comparing the highest versus 
lowest quartile, 2.09; 95% CI, 1.48-2.95; P for trend <.0001), complicated 
diverticulitis (HR, 2.56; 95% CI, 1.10-5.99; P for trend = .02), and recurrence 
requiring hospitalization (HR, 2.76; 95% CI, 1.15-6.62; P for trend = .03). The 
association between visceral fat area and diverticulitis was not materially 
different among different strata of body mass index. Subcutaneous fat area and 
skeletal muscle area were not significantly associated with diverticulitis.
LIMITATIONS: The study population was limited to individuals who underwent CT 
scans for medical indication.
CONCLUSION: Higher visceral fat area derived from CT was associated with 
incident and recurrent diverticulitis. Our findings provide insight into the 
underlying pathophysiology of diverticulitis and may have implications for 
preventive strategies. See Video Abstract.

Copyright © The ASCRS 2025.

DOI: 10.1097/DCR.0000000000003677
PMID: 40272787

Conflict of interest statement: Financial Disclosures: Dr. Kambadakone served as 
a consultant for Bayer and received grants from Bayer, GE Healthcare, and 
PanCAN. Dr. Fintelmann is a speaker for Boston Scientific and received grants 
from Pfizer and the William M. Wood Foundation. Dr. Chan served as a consultant 
for Pfizer Inc., and Boehringer Ingelheim and received grants from Pfizer Inc, 
Zoe Ltd, and Freenome. Dr. Rosenthal served as a consultant for Merck. The other 
authors have no conflict of interest to declare.